falling to 4.7 down just a smidgen on
where it was rishi sunak says the data
is promising gary stevenson
is a former city trader turned economist
and financial campaigner gary thank you
very much for your time this morning so
massive numbers of job vacancies
unemployment down a little rishi sunak
says it's encouraging or promising do
you think he's right to
come to that conclusion
well i mean there's definitely some good
news if you look at it on face value
vacancies are up so that should mean if
you're looking for a job it should be
easy to get one unemployment rate is
coming down
but you know obviously
these are not normal times and covert
has massively affected all the
statistics massively right so we've got
a very high number of vacancies right
but these numbers are for the second
quarter of the year and that's april may
june of this year yeah in that period
basically every single restaurant pub
bar in the country was reopening you
know for the first time in
you know pretty much a year so a lot of
these guys need new staff so it's not
really any surprise that at that period
there was a high level of vacancies um
you know there were a lot of other
things affecting vacancies as well
brexit and covered meant there's fewer
foreign workers um so yeah more
vacancies than usual that is good news
if you're looking for a job but i think
we should be careful reading
too much into these numbers there are a
lot of other things happening in the
economy which could be cause for concern
well let's pick up on brexit because
it's striking isn't it every country in
europe has had covert only britain has
empty supermarket shelves it is plainly
the case
that covid has caused difficulties for
all countries but in this country we've
had the additional unnecessary
self-inflicted damage from brexit
you know
obviously
what we've had is breaks happening at
the same time as kovid right so there's
this tricky situation where it can be
quite difficult for economists to work
out exactly what is being caused by a
coving and what is being caused by
brexit but you know if you look at some
of the areas where there are problems a
lot of them are areas where
traditionally a lot of workers might
have been coming from overseas from the
eu so that's definitely
contributing to
some of the reasons why some industries
are struggling to find workers yes and
of course the government had the option
didn't it last year of extending the
transition period so we wouldn't have to
be fighting these two things at the same
time but it chose not to
take up that option
well i mean obviously the brexit the
russians rolled on and on for a long
time lots of people have got lots of
strong opinions in uh both directions um
look there are problems with some
businesses right now i think really for
me
the main problem which i'm worried about
is um
is going to happen when we
when we everybody comes off furlough are
all of these people at the moment that's
one of the reasons why vacancies are
high because people are unfollowed when
these when the fellow wins are they
going to find new work and the other
thing which i'm always looking at is
what's happening with inequality what's
happening with house prices my big
concern is we're going to see on top of
that potentially big rise is a big rise
in inflation so
really we're sort of on the edge of
something happening here and there's a
lot of big risks which could be about to
ordinary people would know families yeah
and inflation's an interesting one
because it's it's hovering around four
percent just now i think isn't it which
is twice the target rate of of two
percent
and i is is that being driven to an
extent by wage demand because wage
increases are part of the data that
we're seeing as well yeah that's an
excellent question darren if i could
just talk a little bit about that
because it's a really interesting
situation right so if you look at kovid
the government spent about 450 billion
pounds last year in covert support for
the economy you know we all saw the
furlough scheme that was a big part of
the cost right now normally when the
government spends a lot of money they
will tax people or they will borrow
money but in this instance what the
government did was they borrowed money
but they borrowed it from the bank of
england which is part of the government
and the bank of england itself printed
the money so essentially that 450
billion pounds which was due to support
the economy and covered was basically
printed so what happened was in cobit
suddenly the government has discovered
that the magic money tree exists after
all and they've been using it a lot 450
000 pounds that's 10 000 pounds per
adult in the country and that money
doesn't disappear what that means is a
lot of people in this country are
sitting on a lot more money than they
normally have been right and
i came out at the beginning of covert
and said what this is going to cause the
number one thing you're going to see is
first of all inflation but mainly
because we can look at the statistics
now and see that money is being largely
held by richer people you're going to
see massive increase in house prices and
stock prices
my concern is what is it going to do for
inequality
and what is it going to do for the
ability of ordinary people from ordinary
families to buy houses to raise their
kids in and that inequality is already
there of course isn't it because people
who were able to get through the
pandemic
without losing their jobs uh maybe
working from home i find myself my
partner find himself in this very
fortunate position as well able to keep
working but with fewer things to spend
money on so inevitably
resources will stack up you'll end up
with more money at the end of this than
you had going into the pandemic but for
people who
weren't in that position they were
having to dig into whatever savings they
had they maybe lost their job once twice
they were relying on furlough which
might not have made up the entirety of
the money that they were losing and so
the inequality has widened already
hasn't it
yeah i think you've really captured it
darren you know
covert has been such a disastrous
inequality from so many angles right
people who tended to be higher earning
generally kept their jobs the people who
lost their jobs were self-employed
people and lower-earning people right
people who are have very high incomes
saved a huge amount of money because
their spending decreased but ordinary
and poorer people most of their
outgoings are on essentials like renting
bills so they didn't save any money so
what that means is
after already having seen inequality
increasing so much in the last 10 years
now with covert that's really going into
superdrive and what we're seeing is
massive amounts of money stacked up in
the bank accounts of rich individuals
and you know we only had to look back to
2008 to find the crisis where again we
tried to fix a crisis by printing money
that ended up with richer people and how
did that turn out well london house
prices doubled and stock prices went up
500 600
whilst wages have done nothing in 15
years so my real concern is if we don't
do something about the inequality coming
out of kovid now yeah that's going to
happen again and i really worry about
what is that going to mean for ordinary
families if london house prices double
again because i honestly think it could
happen
not just london house prices but uh
london is not necessarily the most
expensive place in the country now to
buy property anyway it might become so
again but there are places where you're
paying potentially 10 11 12 times your
salary yeah we're seeing like i mean
after 2008 the biggest rises are in
london but in the last couple years
actually it's other parts of the country
that have been going up quicker so um
we're seeing you know
it's an epic we've had one epidemic of
covered but in the last 15 years has
been an epidemic of
housing unaffordability in london and
we're going to see that spread
throughout the rest of the country now
we're going to have a real problem what
do young people
from ordinary hardworking families do
when a house costs 10 15 times your
income that's my real concern let's just
end on on the good news story if we zoom
right out and if we park for a moment
the disastrous slow puncture that is
brexit if we can strip that out of the
conversation for a moment god i wish we
could
but let's let's just look at the
recovery from kovid it appears doesn't
it that the pandemic at least in the uk
has not caused
the
quite the disaster that was feared this
was not at the top end
of people's expectations
yeah look we've got a long way to go
with this for sure there's problems down
the line there's a massive government
debt there's huge amounts of money in
the economy there's inequality i talk a
lot about that on my youtube at gary's
economics but what has happened and it's
been amazing here is
what's happening covered is we've seen
that if the government is willing to
stand up and support workers through the
difficult times then really there isn't
any need for people to lose their jobs
you know after 2008 millions and
millions of people lost their jobs yes
but here in kovid governments not just
the uk government but governments all
over the world have came out and said no
we're going to support workers we're
going to make sure those jobs are still
there when we come out of the crisis and
what we've seen is if governments are
willing to support their economies and
support the people in their countries
then we can come through a crisis
without massive lobster massive losses
in workers but there are still a lot of
problems in the system and people need
to be careful gary where can we find you
online once again
gary's economics on twitter and youtube
and facebook everything instagram
you are ubiquitous
yes indeed gary's economics thank you
very much
thank you gary stevenson
as you heard uh joining me this morning
reflecting on that uh but quite good
economic news right a couple of minutes
away from four
housing could be so much more affordable
wages could be so much higher and we
could have so many more options in how
we live our lives
there is one other thing they can do
with that mass amount of income
they can buy your mom's house
you